---
title:  "Course Syllabus"
date:   2020-03-16 08:00:00
categories: logistics
layout: post
---


 - **CS4401 Software Security Engineering**
 - **Term:** D-term 2020
 -  **Location:** Online via Zoom 
 - **Zoom Sessions:** MR 1:00 PM to 2:50 PM
 - **Zoom Link:** [https://wpi.zoom.us/j/376441651](https://wpi.zoom.us/j/376441651) 

### Teaching Staff

 - **Course Intructor:** Prof. Robert Walls
 - **Office:** Meetings via Zoom only 

 - **Teaching Assistant"** Alec Kohlhoff
 - **Office Hours:** Mondays 10-Noon, Tuesdays 11-1:00pm, Wednesdays
   Noon-3:00PM, Thursdays 4:00-6:00pm, Fridays 1:00-3:00PM
 - **Office:** Accessible via Slack and Zoom
 - **Zoom Link:**
   [https://wpi.zoom.us/j/7281866027](https://wpi.zoom.us/j/7281866027) 

 - **Course Co-Designer:** Tim Winters
 - **Office Hours:** N/A 


### Instructor's Description

This course explores low level topics in program security, including both
attacks and defenses. These topics are advanced and this course is designed to
be challenging, yet rewarding.

The centerpiece of this course is the capture-the-flag-style challenge system.
Each class will introduce a new topic related to software security and then
challenge binaries will be released. These binaries will test your knowledge
and skill in detecting vulnerabilities in software and then exploiting these
vulnerabilities. Students who have participated in capture-the-flag
competitions will be familiar with this structure.

This course, by nature, is difficult for many students. In order to exploit
even the most basic bug, you need to have a good understanding of how code is
executed. Our goal is to equip you with the tools and techniques needed to
solve real challenge binaries. However, we do expect a certain level of
baseline knowledge. Here are a few topics that students should be comfortable
with prior to taking this class.

### Recommended Background

The content of this course builds upon  the foundation laid down in *CS2303:
Systems Programming Concept*, *CS2011: Machine Organization and Assembly
Language*, and *CS3013: Operating Systems.* To be successful, it is expected
that you already have a working knowledge of the following tools and topics:

 - The basics of the systems programming, including the C programming language,
   pointers, variable representations, and endianness.
 - The memory layout of C Programs, including the mechanics and purpose of the
   stack, heap, and code sections. 
 - The x86/x64 instruction set architecture, including an ability to read and
   understand assembly language.
 - Basics of operating systems, including system calls, virtual memory,
  threading, and permissions
 - Familiarity with basic tools such as the Bash and GDB.

It is highly recommended to review these topics, **especially assembly language
and reverse-engineering** prior to the first day of class, as they are
**critical** to completion of our coursework.

Historically, students who succeed in this course are students who enjoyed
solving the BombLab and AttackLab challenges from CS2011 and were able to solve
these challenges mostly on their own. 

We understand that many students may need a refresher on assembly language and
the x86 architecture, so here are some resources to review. 

[32-Bit x86 calling convention](https://aaronbloomfield.github.io/pdr/book/x86-32bit-ccc-chapter.pdf)
[64-Bit x86 calling convention](https://aaronbloomfield.github.io/pdr/book/x86-64bit-ccc-chapter.pdf)
[Brief Assembly Refresher](https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~cr4bd/3330/S2018/slides/20180123--slides-1up.pdf)

## Course Policies and Procedures

The following represent the official policies and procedures for the course.
Please review this information and, if you have questions, discuss them with
the professor as soon as possible.

### Ethical Hacking Agreement

All students  must sign the [ethical hacking
agreement](https://cerebro.cs.wpi.edu/ethical_hacking/index.php) to acknowledge
that you will not use the skills you acquire in this course to break the law. 

### Official Communication

Class discussion, class hand-outs, emails to the student’s WPI email account,
and the course Web pages are avenues for official course communication.
Students are responsible for any information posted through these venues.

Our class also has a **slack workspace** that you can turn to for additional
assistance from the TAs and other students from the class. [Here is the
invite link.](https://wpics4401.slack.com/join/signup)


### Lectures

This course will not use live lectures. Instead, I will hold a Zoom meeting
([link](https://wpi.zoom.us/j/376441651)) during our scheduled lecture time.
These Zoom sessions will be more like office hours and the focus will be on
answering questions and student-driven discussion.

**If lectures aren’t lectures than how will the course work?** The answer to
this question is that I will update the [course
schedule](http://cs4401.walls.ninja/logistics/schedule.html) before every
scheduled lecture (i.e., every Monday and Thursday) to include the course
material that will serve as the material for the lecture. My expectation is
that all students will go over the *required* material on the scheduled day of
class so that I can answer any questions during the Zoom session. 

### Textbooks

We will not be using an assigned textbook in this course. Students will be
responsible for obtaining the reading from the links provided by the instructor
and, if needed, printing it out for reading.

### Grading and Binary Challenges

Grades will be determined by the number of challenge points each student earns.
Challenges will be accessible via the course infrastructure and will generally
involve exploiting a bug in a binary to obtain a *flag*. This flag can be
entered into the course webpage to earn the points for that challenge. 

Challenges may cover a variety of categories including lecture practice, binary
exploitation, reverse-engineering, and course participation. In short,
different challenges will require different skills to solve, but the number of
points a challenge is worth denotes a challenge's relative difficulty. Hint:
these flags are unique to each student. Further, the exact steps needed to
solve each challenge will need to be tailored to the student's particular
challenge instance.  Finally, it is a bad idea to hoard flags as they may
expire after a few days! 

**Student independence.** Developing the skills to solve each of the challenges
will require completing assigned readings and videos, practicing with the
introduced tools, and, often, **independent exploration by the student.**  For
example, some challenges may require students to read the documentation for the
`gcc` compiler flags to understand how factors, such as buffer size, might
influence the compilation of the binary, even though such documentation is
never explicitly assigned by the instructor. 

**Challenge time limits.** Challenges will be released periodically as we cover
more material. Some challenges must be solved within a fix amount of time to
receive points, e.g., the lecture challenges. While others will remain
available for the entire duration of the course. 

**Participation challenges.** There are a variety of participation challenges
that a student can earn simply by helping improve the quality of the course.
To obtain the flag for these challenges, the student needs to contact the
instructor via a slack direct message.  

**There is one challenge, called "the bar" that must be solved in order to pass
the course.** In order to solve this challenge, the student must understand all
of the basic attacks introduced in the course. Expect the-bar to be released
a little after the halfway point in the course.  

**Letter grades.** As stated above the final letter grade will depend on the
number of challenge points earned by a student. The particular point cutoff for
each grade will be adjusted based on the overall performance of the class;
however, the final cutoffs will be similar to the following:

 - **C:** 2000 points, including a successful solve of the-bar. This point
   value is roughly what you'd get by solving all lecture challenges plus the-bar. 
 - **B:** 3000 points, including a successful solve of the-bar. This value is
   roughly what you'd get by  solving all lecture challenges, the-bar, and five
other non-lecture challenges.
 - **A:** 4500 points, including a successful solve of the-bar. This value is
   roughly what you'd get by  solving all lecture challenges, the-bar, and ten 
other non-lecture challenges.

The total number of available points will likely be greater than 6500 once all
challenges are released.

**Course Webpage.**All students must submit the challenge flags through the
course webpage. **When creating an account, should use their WPI username,
e.g., `rjwalls`;** **Students must also join the `CS4401` classroom with
teacher `rjwalls`.** If a student does not adhere to these two requirements,
the instructor will not be able to track the student's  progress and, thus,
they will not receive a grade.

### Attacking the Course Infrastructure

Attacking the Course Infrastructure is strictly prohibited. Any attacks will be
met with appropriate disciplinary actions, including but not limited to,
failing the course and notifying the university and local law enforcement. If
you notice a flaw or potential exploit, please notify me directly and do not
attempt to exploit it.


###  Professionalism

Students must treat each other and the teaching staff with respect at all
times. Disagreement, debates, and criticism of ideas are healthy aspects of
academic environments; however, students should be careful to avoid demeaning
language or personal attacks. The ability to handle conflict professionally and
work with a variety of people is an acquired skill, yet it is increasingly
important in technical careers.


### Accommodation statement

WPI is committed to providing an equal educational opportunity for all
students. If you have a documented physical, psychological, or learning
disability on file with Disability Services (DS), you may be eligible for
reasonable academic accommodations to help you succeed in this course. 

Students with disabilities who need to utilize accommodations in this class are
encouraged to contact the Office of Disability Services (ODS) as soon as
possible to ensure that such accommodations are implemented in a timely
fashion. This office can be contacted via email: DisabilityServices@wpi.edu,
via phone: (508) 831-4908, or in person: 124 Daniels Hall. If you have approved
accommodations, please request your accommodation letters online through the
[Office of Disability Services Student
Portal](https://clockwork.wpi.edu/ClockWork/custom/misc/home.aspx).


### Academic Honesty
Students should read and be familiar with [WPI's Academic Honesty
Policy](https://www.wpi.edu/about/policies/academic-integrity/dishonesty).

Cheating is usually the result of other problems in school. Please come see the
course staff if you are unable to keep up with the work for any reason and we
will work something out. We want to see you succeed and will do everything we
can to help you out!

You may discuss material with others, but your code must be your own work.
When in doubt, contact the instructor about whether a potential action would be
considered plagiarism. **When discussing problems with others, do not show any
of your written or programmed solutions to others.** When asking others for
help, it is best to avoid taking direct notes about the solution other than to
jot down publicly available references.  Use only verbal communication (to the
extent possible).

**If you do discuss material with anyone besides the instructors, acknowledge
your collaborators in a write-up.** If you obtain a key insight with help (for
example, through library work or a friend), acknowledge your source, briefly
state the insight, and write up the solution on your own. 

Never misrepresent someone's work as your own. It must be absolutely clear what
material is your original work. You MUST cite all your sources properly. You
must remove any possibility of someone else's work from being misconstrued as
yours. Also note that the facilitation of plagiarism (giving your work to
someone else) is academic dishonesty as well.

Do not provide your solutions to others, either directly or via some sort of
public posting. Doing so is a violation of the WPI's prohibition against
facilitating academic dishonesty.

Plagiarism and other anti-intellectual behavior will be dealt with severely. If
you engage in academic dishonesty, you will almost certainly fail the course.
Investigating plagiarism is an unpleasant experience for both the instructor
and the student. Please help us by avoiding any questionable behavior.

### Submitting New Challenges

Students are encouraged, but not required, to submit new challenge binaries.
When submitting a new binary, please include the source code, solution (e.g.,
as a python script), recommended point value, recommended title, a makefile,
description of the challenge, list of hints, and a list of related challenges.  
